



OCR Results







Supplemental Proceedings: Volume 2: Materials Properties, Characterization, and Modeling

TMS (The Minerals, Metals \& Materials Society), 2012

CONTINUUM SCALE MATERIAL MODELING UNDER LARGE
STRAIN, STRAINRATES AND PRESSURE INCORPORATING

MICROSTRUCTUREEFFECT

Nicola Bonora', Andrew Ruggiero', Gianluca Iannitti', Simone Dichiaro'

'University of Cassino, I-03043 Cassino, Italy
'Techdyn Engineering, I-00199, Rome, Italy
Keywords:'Taylor impact, dynamic tensile extrusion, ductile damage

Abstract

Microstructure effect on the macroscopic material response becomes more evident under high
strain rate deformation. Continuum scale constitutive models requires appropriate modification
for representing microstructural features. In this paper three experimental validation tests,
namely Taylor impact test, the dynamic extrusion test (DTE, high strain rate) and ECAP (low
strain rate), in which the material is subjected to severe plastic deformation and pressure, have
been investigated using an advanced constitutive modeling. The average grain size and
normalized dislocation density are used as microstructure evolution descriptors and two levels of
coupling accounts for the microstructure evolution on the material strength. Numerical
simulations have been validated with experimental data for high purity copper with different
grain size.

Introduction

Metal and alloys under high velocity impact are subjected to large plastic deformation, high
strain rates, elevated pressure and temperature. Under this extreme conditions material
microstructure is subjected to remarkable modifications, which include lattice rotation, grain
stretching and recrystallization, that affect the overall material response at the macroscopic scale.
Understanding material behaviors under these extreme conditions is fundamental for developing
new and more reliable computational design tools. From the experimental standpoint, tests in
which plastic strain, strain rate, pressure and temperature can be arbitrarily varied under
controlled conditions are very limited. In general, two main experimental techniques are
available to investigate material behavior in such dynamic range: the Hopkinson pressure bar and
the flyer plate impact test. In the first the material is loaded under uniaxial stress condition, low
pressure and constant strain rate ranging from 1(''-10' g'; in the latter, the material is tested
under uniaxial strain condition, with pressures of the order of several GPa, low plastic strain and
strain rates of the order of 10'.;(' g', For what concerns advanced material modeling, the
information that can be obtained in these type of tests are fundamental for the identification of
material model parameters but are usually not enough for material modeling validation.
Recently, numerical simulation, based on the inverse calibration technique, has been proved to
be an effective tool to probe material response under extreme conditions, [1]. In this approach,
information about the material constitutive behavior can be extracted from the numerical
simulation of tailored impact tests. Probably, the most well-known test used for this purpose is
the Taylor impact test, [2]. Another dynamic test configuration, called dynamic tensile extrusion
(DTE), has been recently proposed, [3]. The use of these type of tests requires the definition of
validation metrics, i.e. quantities that are measured, either in situ or post mortem, and used as

761


objective functions in the calibration technique. The numerical simulation of these types of test
configurations poses a number of simulation challenges. The development of large plastic
deformation usually implies mesh distortion and convergence issues while softening in the
material response is cause of strain localization and mesh dependence. In the present work a
constitutive framework suited for accounting microstructure modifications and associated effects
at the continuum scales is proposed. Two levels of coupling between the evolution of
microstructure descriptors and the overall material response are considered. A procedure for the
identification of the material model parameters based on both characterization and validation
tests is presented. Results for high purity copper are presented.

Material, characterization tests, validation tests and metrics

The material investigated in this work is 99.99%2 high purity copper. The AR material was 1/2
hard copper in form of continuous extruded bars. The material was fully annealed at 400'C,
600'C and 800'C resulting in homogeneous microstructure with 65, 118 and 185 um grain size
respectively. Annealing was performed in nitrogen atmosphere. The three copper grades,
indicated hereafter as 65Cu, 118Cu and 185Cu, were characterized performing quasi static
traction and compression tests and dynamic traction tests. For high rate testing a direct traction
Hopkinson bar was used, [4]. In addition to this, the following validations tests were performed:
a) Taylor impact test at different impact velocities (150-420 m/s) and b) DTE test at 300 and 400
m/s. Impact tests were performed using a light gas-gun with 7,62 mm bore. Plate impact data on
copper with same purity and grain size were obtained from the literature. In the Taylor impact
test a cylinder of the material of interest (usually with a length/diameter ratio equal to 5) is
launched, at prescribed velocity, orthogonally against a rigid surface. The validation metrics for
the Taylor impact included: correlation between experimental and simulated profiles; final
lengthldiameter/bulge diameter; final volume; length of elastic zone in deformed sample; time
resolved deformed shape; grain size and hardness variation along the sym axis. The DTE test
consists in launching a projectile (a sphere in its early configuration) into a conical dime having
outlet diameter smaller than that of the projectile. During its flight into the dime, the projectile is
subjected to compressive and shear waves. If the velocity is high enough the projectile is
dynamically extruded leading to a jet that fragments as a result of the velocity difference
between the tail and the tip. The validation metrics for the DTE is: the number of fragments, the
shape and size of the fragments, the exit velocity, the grain size distribution in the segment
trapped into the dime.

Constitutive modeling

Deformation of metals and alloys under dynamic conditions, such as those occurring in high
velocity impacts, is a complex process. In order to develop a flexible modeling tool a module
based approach is proposed. Each module is designed to describe a specific aspect of the
constitutive response of the material under investigation. According to the assumption made,
different levels of coupling between the modules can be implemented. For what concerns ductile
metals and alloys the following modules have been considered.
Elastsit
For what concern the material plastic flow curve, a Johnson-Cook (JC) type of formulation has
been adopted, Although phenomenologically based, this formulation has the major advantage to
allow the separation of the effects associated with plastic strain, strain rate and temperature. The
JC relationship in its general form can be given as,

762


,(c.4,.4)- rw,wo(4,)r(r)

Assuming a Voce type hardening law it follows,

Fc,)-o,fi-A.eo(44,)]

where o, is the reference yield stress, R, is the isotropic hardening stress and k a material
constant. Taking into account for both thermally activated processes and phonon drag effects on
the yield stress,

]
G0,)-]-ci-c]-l ]
LJ ]

where C4, C and Cg are material parameters and e,, is the reference strain rate. Thermal
softening effect, resulting from the conversion of the plastic work into heat, is given by

r]
no)-]4,, ;
IL. t i
i s'-- ]

where T, is the melting temperature and Cg a material parameter.

uation of state
For what concerns the equation of state (EOS), pressure effect in metals and alloys becomes
relevant for pressure higher than 10-100GPa. Linear equation of state has been used in this work
as follows,

-x'.

where K is the bulk modulus and V, the initial volume. Alternatively Mie-Gruneisen exression is
used,

o0.n-0) [e-c-0)]

where G is the gamma Gruneisen and e is the internal energy.
Ductile dama e
Damage in ductile metals and alloys is the result of the irreversible deformation processes that
occurs in the material microstructure. Damage has the effect to progressively reduce the initial
material properties resulting in material failure when the entire load carrying capability is lost. In
continuum damage mechanics (CDM), damage variable accounts for damage effects and the
damage kinetic law of evolution is not necessarily linked to a specific mechanism. In this way it

763


is possible to generalize damage description and account for the effects not only associated to
visible ductile damage, such as voids and cavities, but also to other mechanisms such as
twinning, dislocation cells and tangles formation. Among the available CDM model formulation
available in the literature, [5-6], the Bonora damage model has been selected in this work [7].
This model formulation offers the possibility to represent the damage evolution law for several
classes of metals and alloys using the same expression for the damage dissipation potential. This
model requires the knowledge of four material damage parameters only that can be determined
accordingly to well defined procedures based on both experiments and numerical simulation. It
has been proved to accurately account for the effect of stress triaxiality on the material ductility,
that is a necessary condition for the transferability of model prediction from laboratory sample to
component geometry [8]. According to this, the damage evolution law is given by,

with,
D.r
do'
dD a---R.,-(D,.-D)- --
ln(s,44,)

n.-e0--o-3-2e(./c,)

where o, is the pressure and o, is the von Mises stress. Here, p' is the equivalent plastic strain
accumulated under positive (tensile) state of stress, aa, 4, D- and a are model parameters. More
details on the derivation of the model and about the meaning and the determination of the model
parameters are given elsewhere, [9].
Microstructure evolution
Continuum scale modeling suffers the limitation that microstructural features cannot be
accounted for due to the fact that properties are homogenized at the material point. In order to
develop a simple but effective model for describing the modification of the microstructure, as a
consequence of the deformation process, the following approach was followed. Microstructure
state was modeled by means of the normalized average density of mobile dislocations, f and the
average grain size d, During plastic deformation the following processes may take place and
contribute to the microstructure evolution: plastic hardening, recovery, recrystallization,
isothermal grain growth and plastic strain grain growth, Following theoretical scheme proposed
by Lin and Liu [10], the following modified set of equations is proposed,

i 4
7-n-](1-7)--cA -exp]--1s
1-J
y4J
d -a,,d''-+a -d''-a7(d -d,)m-S''.s
4

A,--( -x)r

e e
S c --i=-7-A(i-s)l(-sy'
4,'

764


here do, dr , cn.cz, cs. 4o. 4n. az, m, )n, Ao Qo, N, are material parameters that can be
determined by means of reverse engineering approach of validation test such as ECAP (equal
channel angular process). S is the recrystallization volume fraction and x is a time variable for
the recrystallization process.
Vounlins
Several levels of coupling can be selected. At the present stage only the following two coupling
levels have been used. First, the effect of the evolution of the grain size with the plastic strain,
strain rate and temperature, on the material yield stress is accounted for by means of the Hall-
Petch relationship,

o, = o' +-s-
sd

where A is a material parameter. A second level of coupling is given by the dependence of the
material melting temperature on the average grain size. According to Zhao et al. [11] the
following relationship can be written,

2 s.,IR )
r-e] ;7':]

where S,, is the vibrational part of overall melting entropy, R is the ideal gas constant and d- is
the critical size of grain.
Stochastic dama e and rain size distribution
In order to take into account material variability and to break the symmetry in the numerical
simulations, a stochastic formulation for damage parameters eg and eg, for the initial grain size d
size and the reference yield stress og, has been used. For all four parameters a normal
distribution has been assumed while the respective mean value and standard deviation have been
assigned, In finite element analysis, for a given seed parameter, random distribution has been
generated at element gausspoint level.

Numerical simulation, identification procedure and results

The proposed constitutive model was implemented in the commercial finite element code
MSC.MARC. MSC.MARC is an implicit finite element code particularly suited for large plastic
deformation problems involving contacts. Dynamic transient analysis can be performed by
means of direct integration using generalized Humbolt algorithm. Analyses have been performed
using large strain, finite deformation and lagrangian updating formulation. During dynamic
transient, coupled thermo-mechanical analysis has been performed in order to account for heat
generated during plastic deformation and change properties due to temperature variations.
Ductile failure has been simulated by means of element removal technique. In order to keep the
element mesh as much regular as possible during deformation and contact, automatic global
remeshing technique has also been used. Numerical simulation of Taylor impact test, of the DTE
test and ECAP has been performed. For what concerns the Taylor impact test and the DTE test,
the anvil and the dime were modeled as deformable bodies using strain rate sensitivity material
model. For the identification of the microstructure model parameters a four passes ECAP process
has been simulated.

765


The identification of all model parameters has been performed as follows. From the
characterization tests material plastic flow and damage parameters reference values were
determined. Successively a reverse identification process was performed using a structural
optimization software. Here, the identification metrics for each validation test were used as
objective functions in the optimization process. In Figure l an example of the comparison for the
computed and the experimental deformed shape profile for the Taylor impact cylinder is given.
Here the final calculated deformed shape is given together with that obtained neglecting
temperature and strain rate effect to show the differences. In Figure 2, the summary of the
optimization process in terms of error on the total length vs error on the final radius of the Taylor
cylinder is given. In Figure 3 an example of the inital mesh for the DTE is shown while in Figure
4 the comparison of the predicted and recovered samples in the DTE test at 400 m/s is shown. In
Table 1, the summary of the predicted metric in terms of number and size of the fragment for
different initial grain size is also given. It is worth to note here how the proposed model predicts
accurately features correlated with the material microstructure.

' AsAecaved V,st9B,4 mls
A -4- Eo dala dala
r2Z7-.

-Work hard 8temperatre (p54,38 s)

Axaldmtance mnm]

Figure 1 - Comparison of the predicted deformed profile for Taylor impact test after structural

i--
g-
optimization

g
e24.
r

e
-'-
ozo c

Figure 2 - Summary of the structural optimization process for the total length vs the final radius

metrics objective function

766



a Z.' 'eoLA.,.
r
g

Figure 3 - Example of initial FEM mesh for the DTE test.
1o
Ts
L
w4s- w

5 10 15 2o 25 30 35 4o

Im

Figure 4 - Comparison of the predicted and recovered DTE fragments at 400 m/s.

Gain
size
gm
118
185
Elong.
(exp)
No. of No. of
2 Er 2zf
40.6 5
37.6 5
34 35 4s

Table 1 - Summary of the predicted number of fragments in the DTE as a function of the initial

grain size.
Conclusions

In the present work a constitutive framework for modeling material constitutive response under
extreme conditions is presented. The proposed approach is based on a ''module'' logic in order to
incorporate in the model a number of features and possible level of coupling between modules.
The proposed constitutive framework has been applied to investigate the dynamic response of
high purity copper under different initial microstructure. The identification of the numerous
material model parameters has been performed by means of structural optimization of simulated
validation tests. It has been found that Taylor impact test and dynamic tensile extrusion are
robust candidates for the identification of most of the model parameters while ECAP is an
promising test case to for the identification of the microstructure model, Computational results
obtained with the optimized set of parameters allows to reproduce the expected material response
with high degree of accuracy including effects associated with the initial microstructure such as
the number and size of the fragments in DTE.

767


References

[1]Gray Iii, G.'T., Maudlin, P.J., Hull, L. M., Zuo, 0. K., and Chen, S.-R., 2005, 'Predicting
Material Strenght, Damage and Fracture,'' Los Alamos Science, 29, pp. 80-93.
[2]Taylor, G., 1948, 'The Use of Flat-Ended Projectiles for Determining Dynamic Yield Stress
I. Theoretical Considerations,'' Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A,
Mathematical and Physical, 194 (1038), pp. 289-299.
[3] Gray Iii, G.'T., Cerreta, E., Yablinsky, C. A., Addessio, L. B., Henrie, B. L., Sencer, B. H.,
Buckett, M., Maudlin, P.J., Maloy, S. A.,Trujillo, C. P., and Lopez, M. F., 2005, 'Influence of
Shock Prestraining and Grain Size on the Dynamic-Tensile-Extrusion Response of Copper:
Experiments and Simulation,'' eds., SHOCK COMPRESSION OF CONDENSED MATTER-
2005: Proceedings of the Conference of the American Physical Society Topical Group on Shock
Compression of Condensed Matter, 845, pp. 725-728.
[4] Bonora, N., Ruggiero, A., Flater, P.J., House, J. W., and Deangelis, R. J., 2005, 'On the Role
of Material Post-Necking Stress-Strain Curve in the Simulation of Dynamic Impact,'' eds.,
Conference of the American Physical Society Topical Group on Shock Compression of
Condensed Matter, Baltimore, pp.
[5] Krajcinovic, D., 1989, 'Damage Mechanics,' Mechanics of Materials, 8 (2-3), pp. 117-197.
[6] Lemaitre, J., 1985, ''A Continuous Damage Mechanics Model for Ductile Fracture,'' Journal
of Engineering Material and Technology, 107, pp. 83-89.
[7] Bonora, N., 1997, 'A Nonlinear Cdm Model for Ductile Failure,' Engineering Fracture
Mechanics, 58 (1-2), pp. 11-28.
[8] Bonora, N., Gentile, D., Pirondi, A., and Newaz, G., 2005, ''Ductile Damage Evolution under
Triaxial State of Stress:'Theory and Experiments,'' International Journal of Plasticity, 21 (5), pp.
981-1007.
[9] Bonora, N., Ruggiero, A., Esposito, L., and Iannitti, G., 2009, 'Damage Development in
High Purity Copper under Varying Dynamics Condistions and Microstructural States Using
Continuum Damage Mechanics,'' eds., SHOCK COMPRESSION OF CONDENSED MATTER
- 2009: Proceedings of the Conference of the American Physical Society Topical Group on
Shock Compression of Condensed Matter, Nashville, TN, pp.
[10] Lin, J., Liu, Y., and Dean, T. A., 2005, ''A Review on Damage Mechanims, Models and
Calibration Methods under Various Deformation Conditions,'' international Journal of Damage
Mechanics, 14, pp. 299-319.
[11]Zhao, M., Li,J. C., and Jiang, 0., 2003, 'Hall-Petch Relationship in Nanometer Size
Range,'' Journal of alloys and compounds 361 ((1-2)), pp. 160.

768



